...rings, only they don't ring. They don't ring.
And so the result is, I'm always looking at my
watch, looking to tape frantically, so we only end
up taping 15 minutes it doesn't appear.
Concerning deep ocean mining, are you optimistic
or not optimistic about the ability to do this?
Well, I think it would be a tremendous engineering
feat if they can do it. I think, again, it's an
economic question. the manganese nodules that
they're chasing. I guess the big problem with that
is they're waiting for the price of manganese to go
up high enough. And then it'll become
economically feasible.
I'm sure there's a whole bunch of different things
they can go out and try and scavenge up. And of
course, it's environmental, I mean an economic
question. Near shore resource recovery, you
know, of course down in Texas you know about the
oil. On the east coast they've been dredging up
gravel for a long time.
I'm not really up on that so I don't know what other
kinds of things they can run around and harvest.
It wasn't deep ocean mining, but of course the
Germans were going to pay off the First World War
debt with gold. I mean, there's a tremendous
reservoir of material out there. And whether you
can extract it or not, it's straight down to the
bottom line. Do you make money at it or don't you
make money at it? So I guess when other stocks or
materials get expensive enough to try and get them
out of the ocean.
Now, I have a series of questions concerning
undergraduate training, which ought to be...
In terms of training for oceanography, do you
think it's better to go and take a degree in the hard
sciences and then come to oceanography late, or to
go through a general undergraduate training in
oceanography, or what? Well, this is a rhetorical
problem we have in this department time and time
again, because we're the only ones that have an
undergraduate degree in oceanography. If you
look at the players in the game, at least my age or
older, or even some of them younger, we all came
from another area and ended up in oceanography.
I'm not really sure what kind of a approach to take.
Again, I don't see any particular desirability to
go one way or the other. I wouldn't want to see us get
stamped into the mold of going one way or the other.
I still think you've got to be,
you've got to have the depth in one area, and then
hopefully broaden your sight somewhat. it gets
extremely difficult talking to people with just
the broad brush view on things, because you always
end up talking about the nitty-gritty somewhere
along the line, and then you lose them. So I think
we'll see recruitment coming into the field the
same way as it has in the past, and that is people
coming out of a discipline in the regular, quote,
sciences, and then playing in the ocean, using
their expertise in the ocean. It's kind of
interesting if you look at people, again, my age or
older, which is, what, 39, I think. I think, by and
large, most of them had something to do with the
ocean before they became a scientist. They grew up
on it, they sailed on it, they swam in it, or
something like this, and some sort of a
fascination that way got them into the field. I
guess I can look back on my own, you know, how I got
into the business was that I never thought they
would pay people to do this kind of thing, you know.
And it's, you know, a very fascinating and
interesting area. And having come from a family
that used to work for a living, I was rather
surprised, you know, that you could in fact make a
living doing this sort of thing. So I don't see any
any real need to get very excited about whether we
should do the recruitment the way most of us have
come into it or whether you should do it through the
undergraduate route. The only thing I'm afraid of
is that our undergraduates don't have enough
depth in any one discipline.
And I hate like heck to see everybody come up that
way. We've been a little bit lax here. We've been
trying to find out what's happened to our
graduates.
I don't think it's, well, if you go through any
scientific discipline, if you look at the guy's
major as an undergraduate and find out where he
ends up, very few of them really go on into graduate
school and that thing. So the fact that we know that
a lot of our undergraduates don't end up in
oceanography shouldn't really be
disappointing, because the other disciplines
have the same track record but if you happen to well
it goes back to when the person makes a decision on
what he wants to be you know when he grows up if for
some reason somebody can come into you know a 15 or
16 year old kid says I'm going to be an
oceanographer and if he really knows what being an
oceanographer is and if that's really what he
wants to do and maybe getting them here as an
undergraduate and then prodding them to get his
expertise in a certain area, that's probably OK.
But for an ordinary run-of-the-mill kid, heck,
most of them don't even know what they want to do
when they get to graduate school. And so I'm not
sure we're doing anybody a favor or a disservice by
taking them on as undergraduates. But I still
think. you need some depth in some area if you're
going to be a practicing scientist. Probably, I'd
hazard a guess, or I would like to think, that the
people that come through here as undergraduates,
if they go into whatever they go into, and if they
ever get in a situation where they have to make
decisions that affect us later on, at least they
know more about what we're talking about. i.e.,
they go into government or something like this.
And if they end up in some rather remotely
connected field, then I think you'd look at their
undergraduate training as a broadening
experience, which I think is what... I think we'd
like to see that come out of colleges. I don't think
we're really running vocational schools. I hate
like heck to think that we're just running
training programs to train people for jobs. I'd
like to take the more philosophical point of view
that this is an age that kids are developing ideas.
They're growing up.
Well, like when I went away to college, I went away
from home. was in an area where it was rather
forgiving. We all make mistakes. And that's a time
that I guess you've got to do them. Preferably, you
can do them then and not have them count. And so the
philosophy behind an undergraduate program is
something that we haven't really talked about in
this department. Like I said, we are the only ones
in the United States, I think, with a
degree-granting program in oceanography on the
undergraduate level. but I don't think we've ever
seriously tried to track down all our graduates
and see what happens to them. I have the feeling
that we end up graduating a very small percentage
of the entering freshmen, but that's sort of a
trick in how they count credits in this university
here, because it turns out that many of the
biologically oriented people that come through
as undergraduates end up with either joint
degrees in zoology and oceanography, or if they
missed the requirement along the way, it turns out
that they don't have to do anything and they get a
degree in zoology. So then they fall out of our
statistics the way we keep them now. And probably
the same thing happened in chemistry and probably
physics, too. But again, I think to be a practicing
player, in the oceanography game, I think you've
got to have a depth in one area. Because
oceanography is kind of a problem to really define
it as a discipline. It's kind of an amorphous
field. And we've seen an awful lot of people sort of
trooping in. And they leave a few footprints, and
they end up somewhere else. And they might even
come back. So it's not such a rigid thing.
discipline. Well, maybe the other fields are. I
haven't had any experience with the other fields,
but I don't think it's all that rigid of an area.
Now, in that sense, what direction is
oceanography going to go? What are the so-called
hot fields in oceanography? I may use this word.
You know, at one time, for example, nuclear
engineering in oceanography was identified with
each other in terms of career opportunities. What
now? Okay, as far as career opportunities go,
we don't have the real brightness that we thought
we had a few years ago. We're probably a little bit
brighter than as far as career opportunities.
Broadly speaking, I think, well, perhaps one of
the, at least in the biological area, one of the
major areas that's going to expand over the next
decade or so is predictability. And this has been
prodded by the environmental problem.
Well, the money to move down this avenue, I think,
has been prodded by the environmental problem. If
you go back and look at some of the older
literature, of course, this is what they've been
trying to do all along, predictability, the
ordering of the knowledge, you know, both action
wise and how can you predict what's going to
happen. And again, in biology, that's probably
the big area. But that's such a broad area. I mean,
we can use it, again, to play the food for the hungry
millions game.
We can look at it from, you know, if you stress the
system, what happens to the populations
involved, i.e., these species? You know, does
species A fall out? You know, who becomes
dominant? There's a couple really big major
questions in biological oceanography that
haven't been answered. And quite frankly, I don't
know how the heck you can answer them. And that's
one of the things that sort of prods us is that
we know that species composition changes by
environmental perturbations, but we don't know
if that really has any effect on productivity.
If you want to sort of sidestep the whole issue,
again, going back to this thing I was telling you
about Heathrow Airport, we know that that there's
codfish off Greenland. And if the average sea
surface temperature drops a half a degree
centigrade or a degree centigrade, they're going
to disappear. Now, if you're a cod connoisseur,
it's a disaster. But maybe you end up with a lot of
sea urchins out there. So maybe the actual
productivity won't change, just that we don't
recognize the end product as a resource, unless
you're a sea urchin connoisseur. So I think
there's a lot of... large questions with
ramifications of them that are questions that you
can narrow down enough to work on and do an
experiment, collect some data, play the
hypothesis testing game to keep us busy for an
awful long time. But I think the so-called hot
areas are probably the predictability and the
modeling aspect. Those are probably true for all
the areas in oceanography, not just biology. I
sort of get annoyed with computer simulation as an
answer to everything, but I did buy one of those
things, which is a tremendous little toy. And
that's getting pretty close to it.
The
whole thing about science, I guess, is the
predictability, the hierarchical ordering of
knowledge. We're playing the game just like all
the other areas. The other high-energy physics,
for instance, I mean, they've
gotten down to looking at such little tiny things
that I personally don't find that very
satisfying. I like to be able to hold my hand when
I'm working with it. One of the nicer things about
oceanography is that it's still a relatively
young field You can sort of keep up with the
literature. It's kind of a hassle. It takes a fair
amount of my time, but as opposed to some of the
other disciplines, I mean, boy, I would be pity to
the kids getting into molecular biology and all
that sort of stuff. Just the backlog of
information these kids have to sieve through is
just frightening. I try to keep a fair number of
journals. Mainly if they don't pass my desk, I
don't send them. But I used to read Biochem Med by
Phys Acta. And back when I was a beginning graduate
student, each year you had about 18, well, 20,
maybe 28 inches on the shelf. Well, nowadays, the
same journal, if you get the various series,
there's probably three or four shelves. And I
don't know how you keep up with that sort of stuff.
But that's, maybe I'm lazy. I don't want to spend
all my time reading it. The other thing about
oceanography is that I think there's still some
important discoveries to be made. The
people at Woods Hole were kind of stuck up about
this, and they said, oh, what the heck are you
reading literature for? Because you're writing
it. You don't have to read it. You should be the guy
right up there in the front and writing it all. But
who can predict breakthroughs are solutions to
big problems or something like this. But I still
think there's some reasonably large size
problems that are definable right now in
biological oceanography that are unanswered.
And in that way it's kind of, I hate to use the word
challenging, but I guess that's what I mean as
opposed to some of the other disciplines where
they keep poking and poking and poking and
breakthroughs are totally unprotected. I mean,
you're really flailing around in the dark trying
to find that big thing that's going to propel you to
the Nobel Prize. I don't think anybody in
oceanography is ever going to have to worry about
that one, but
there are still some nice, fairly definable
problems in oceanography to be worked on. For
example? Well, the whole thing, what does species
composition do it? honest-to-goodness
production in an area. The interaction between
energy flow and population dynamics on the
species level. This one, the only thing that's
discouraging about that area is that people have
been hassling this thing for an awful long time, so
somebody's got the right answer for the wrong
reason and he doesn't know it. So maybe that
wouldn't be as rewarding as, you know, stumbling
onto something completely new. But
as opposed to some of the other disciplines, of
course, I mean that's a minor problem. Again, the
other disciplines are so damn specialized now
that
I just pity the poor kids getting into it. But I
think that's one of the big ones. Okay, the one
we're playing around with right now is how to
Organisms on the bottom of the ocean make a living.
If you dredge up a clam that's a half inch in
diameter, he might be 50 years old.
Some of the other things that I'm constantly
surprised at, and I've seen it time and time again,
is you dredge up some of these fish from a couple
thousand meters down, which most people have only
seen pictures of, and they never read the scale on
the bottom, and they're only this big. But they
might be 50 years old, too. And how do organisms
make a living out there? I think it's a
major unanswered question. Again, going back to
the food for the million, there is a genus,
cyclotone, I think is the correct pronunciation
of it. There's probably more of those things than
anything else in the world, that species than any
other fish species in the world. There must be
billions and billions and billions of metric tons
out there. The only trouble is there's only one per
cubic meter, so you can't catch them. But that's
probably the fish production in the ocean.
There's probably more biomass tied up in that
mid-water genus than everybody else. You
probably can't catch them. Again, economically,
it's not feasible to catch them. But again, every
time I'm on a boat where they drag up one of those
things, it's... I'm always impressed. Mainly
because, I don't think I have the book here, but
Marshall, I think, was the one who wrote it. No,
Norman, History of Fishers. And he's got these
nice color plates in there. They show these guys
with these big teeth and the big eyes and all the
four to fours and stuff like this. But they're only
two inches long.
You always have some pleasant surprises. And like
I said, I've seen that, I can't Hundreds of times,
but I'm still impressed with it every time I see it.
What about declining fields of oceanography?
Physical oceanography, for example. It seems
like people don't work in physical oceanography
anymore at the same rate they used to. Well, I think
we've seen a major shift, and this is kind of a
touchy point in this department because we have a
large number of people that call themselves
physical oceanographers. But they're really
applied mathematicians. And we see an awful lot of
numerical modeling trying to explain phenomena
that go on in the ocean. My major gripe is that an
awful lot of the practitioners of that particular
kind of science don't go to sea. I don't think they
know what, I don't think they really grasp what's
going on out there. And again, they're in an area in
theoretical physical oceanography, fluid
hydrodynamics primarily, again, where they're
beginning to get down to how many angels can stand
on a head of the pen. It seems that they work the
field over very well so that on the broad aspects,
the parts that are mostly utilizable by anybody
else, i.e. a merchant marine, the weather people,
and things like this. A lot of these things are
reasonably well known, and so now they're getting
down to the real fine-grained nitty-gritty,
which I'm sure must be interesting to them,
otherwise they wouldn't do it, but its
relationship to other areas in science is greatly
diminished. So that we see a lot of emphasis on
physical oceanography in this department.
Probably half the faculty is what I would call
physical oceanographers here, but very few of
them go to sea.
Most of them, not most of them, a fair number of them
are looking at extremely small scale phenomena,
which
as a biological oceanographer doesn't do much for
me. I'm still stuck with large-scale motions in
the ocean. You know, worried about movements
through the thermocline, the picnic line, things
like this. But these people are worrying about
even smaller-scale stuff than that, so that
they're... Again, they don't have a heck of a lot to
tell me about anything that I have a problem with,
although I fully appreciate that most of the
biological problems in coastal waters is driven
by the physical processes. But again, what
they're telling me or what they're working on
doesn't help me with that at all. There are people
who work with that, but it seems to be a minor
concern of the physical oceanographers now as
compared to, say, 10 or 15 years ago. Now, I have
another question along that line, too, Robert.
Roger Revell has suggested what's wrong with the
modern oceanographers. He no longer gets his feet
wet. Would you agree with that? Yep. Okay. Okay. He
has also suggested that one of the problems with
marine biologists is that with the advent of the
computers and the vast amount of data coming in,
that people don't have familiarity anymore with
their data. All they have familiarity with are
data sheets. Yeah, you see a lot of that too. And so
then you think that perhaps, I don't want to use
the, I don't, the question is not well worded. I
don't mean that oceanography has become too
sophisticated. but that possibly more field work
should occur in oceanography. Yeah, I agree with
that. One of my criteria is to accept the graduate
student. He's got three things he or she has to be
able to do. They have to be able to do things with
their hands. They have to be able to do things with
their heads. By God, they've got to be able to go to
sea. I mean, if they don't go to sea, then I won't
touch them. Okay, I go to sea, oh,
let's see, next year I'm scheduled 70 days out of
the year, and I went through a tabulation for
somebody else a little while ago. Okay, I've been
in the field for 13 years, two and a half years I was a
bureaucrat in Washington, and in aggregate I've
got something like 24 months at sea, which, um,
Well, if you're a mariner, of course, that doesn't
mean much, but compared to most of the people I talk
to around here, that's an awful lot of time in the
city. And anybody that I'm going through the
educational process with, they're going to be
field-oriented people. I've got some kids here,
some graduate students, I guess they're not kids,
They grew up the same way that I did. They were
underwater. One of them happens to be a blue water
sailboat racing type.
But he's got a good head. He remembered things. And
he's seen things. He's felt things out in the
ocean. And he's got a lot of insight into some
problems that people, again, we've got some
biological oceanographers who never really have
been to sea. And it's taken them 15 years to get to
the same state of development as this kid is. Of
course, he's been doing it for over 15 years too,
but he hasn't been a professional in the business
for 15 years. Here's a guy starting out. He'll
probably finish up next winter. And he's probably
got as much innate feel for what's going on in the
ocean that he's learned what the technical jargon
is so he can describe it since he's been a student.
to match up to some of these 50-year-old people
around here that have been in the business all
their lives. I think a lot of oceanographers
have real problems because they don't go to sea.
They forget what's going out there. And they're,
well, I can sit here. This happens to be one of my pet
peeves, as you probably figured out. And I've seen
people whose idea of a of the ocean is a matrix in a
computer bank. And they keep interrogating this
matrix that they've generated there. Sometimes
they've even gotten some real data in to generate
the matrix, but a lot of times they don't because
the computers can't handle the real problems.
They're just too complex. They're not fast
enough. It costs too much money to model it.
I really get annoyed at people who tell me about
this or that, or they'll tell me that this
measurement that I've done isn't really up to
snuff. There are better ways of doing it. Yes, I
know there are better ways of doing it, but you
can't do them out there. The instrument doesn't
work, let's say.
And again, with the way the funding situation is
going, unless you're extremely queued about
things, it's pretty tough to get students out to
sea. The government won't pay for it anymore.
Well, that was my next question. What about ship
time? One of the problems with oceanographers who
want to go to sea, it seems to me, is a limited amount
of ship time available to institutions. Well, I
think, yeah, okay. You can flip this coin both
ways. If you go and look at the proposals that they
send in, and how much money they need to run the
ships. It turns out that if we're going to run all
our ships all year long, there's not enough money.
But it might also be true that there's not enough
worthwhile seagoing science to keep all the ships
busy.
We play this game every year. Well, of course, now I
take a partisan point of view being here in
Washington. in the University of Washington, but
back when I was at NSF, we had a, we played the flip
game, and the problem, well, one of the problems,
one of the bureaucratic problems is that nobody
has ever tried to figure out how much ship time was
really required. We just know that we seem to be
spending an inordinately large amount of money
for ship time for the science that goes on the
ships. Of course, you can rectify that by One of two
ways, you can cut down the ship time bucks so you can
put in more dollars into the science that goes on
the ships. But in two and a half years at the Science
Foundation, at least in the biological
oceanography program, I don't think I've ever
seen a worthwhile seagoing program that wasn't
funded and given the ship time to do it. And so you
always end up, you know, one of the rhetorical
questions was, if you had more money in biological
oceanography, what would happen? And the pan
answer was you'd fund more incompetent
scientists.